good evening i'm pauline frederick of
npr moderator of the second of the
historic debates of the 1976 campaign
between gerald r ford of michigan
republican candidate for president and
jimmy carter of georgia democratic
candidate for president thank you
president ford and thank you governor
carter for being with us tonight
this debate takes place before an
audience in the palace of fine arts
theater in san francisco an estimated
one hundred million americans are watching on
television as well san francisco was the
site of the signing of the united
nations charter thirty-one years ago
thus it is an appropriate place to hold
this debate the subject of which is
foreign and defense issues the
questioners tonight are max frankel
associate editor of the new york times
henry l trewhitt diplomatic correspondent
of the baltimore sun and richard
valeriani diplomatic correspondent of
nbc news the ground rules tonight are
basically the same as they were for the
first debate two weeks ago the questions
will be alternated between candidates by
the toss of a coin
governor carter will take the first
question each question sequence will be
as follows the question will be asked
and the candidate will have up to three
minutes to answer his opponent will have
up to two minutes to respond and prior
to the response the questioner may ask a
follow-up question to clarify the
candidate's answer when necessary with up
to two minutes to reply each candidate
will have three minutes for a closing
statement at the end president ford and
governor carter do not have notes or
prepared remarks with them this evening
but they may take notes during the
debate and refer to them mr frankel
you have the first question for governor
carter governor since the democrats last ran
our foreign policy including many of the
men who are advising you country has
been relieved of the vietnam agony and
the military draft we've started arms
control negotiations with the russians
we've opened relations with china we've
arranged the disengagement in the middle
east we've regained influence with the
arabs without deserting israel now maybe
we've even begun a process of peaceful
change in africa
now you've objected in this campaign to
the style with which much of this was
done and you've mentioned some other
things that that you think ought to have
been done but do you really have a
quarrel with this republican record
would you not have done any of those
things well i think this republican
administration has been almost all style
and spectacular and not substance we've
uh got a chance tonight to talk about first
of all leadership the character of our
country and a vision of the future in
every one of these instances the ford
administration has failed
and i hope tonight that i and mr ford
will have a chance to discuss the reason
for those failures our country is not
strong anymore
we're not respected anymore we can only
be strong overseas if we're strong at
home and when i become president we'll not
only be strong in those areas but also
in defense a defense capability
second to none we've lost in our foreign
policy the character of the american people
we've uh ignored or excluded the american
people and the congress from participation
in the shaping of our foreign policy it's
been one of secrecy and exclusion in
addition to that we've had a chance to
become now contrary to our long-standing
beliefs and principles the arms
merchant of the whole world we've tried
to buy success from our enemies and at
the same time we've excluded from the
process the normal friendship of our
allies in addition to that we've become
fearful to compete with the soviet union
on an equal basis
we talk about detente the soviet union
knows what they want in detente and
they've been getting it we have not
known what we've wanted and we've been
out traded in almost every instance the
other point i want to make is about our
defense we've got to be a nation blessed
with a defense capability that's
efficient tough capable well organized
narrowly focused fighting capability the
ability to fight if necessary is the
best way to avoid the chance for or the
requirement to fight and the last point
i want to make is this mr ford mr
kissinger have uh continued on with the
policies and failures of richard nixon
even the republican platform has
criticized the lack of leadership in mr
ford and they've criticized the foreign
policy of this administration this is
one instance where i agree with with the
republican platform i might say this in
closing and that is that as far as
foreign policy goes mr kissinger has
been the president of this country mr
ford has shown an absence of leadership
and an absence of a grasp of what this
country is and what it ought to be
that's got to be changed and that is one
of the major issues in this uh campaign of
1976 president ford would you like to
respond governor carter again is talking in
broad generalities let me take just one
question that he raises the military
strength and capability of the united
states governor carter in november of
1975 indicated that he wanted to cut the
defense budget by 15 billion dollars a
few months later he said he wanted to
cut the defense budget by eight or nine
billion dollars and more recently he
talks about cutting the defense budget
by five to seven billion dollars there
is no way you can be strong militarily
and have those kind of reductions in our
military uh appropriation now let me just
tell you a little story
about late october of 1975 i asked the
then secretary of defense mr
schlesinger to tell me what had to be
done if we were going to reduce the
defense budget by uh three to five billion
dollars a few days later mr schlesinger
came back and said if we cut the defense
budget by three to five billion dollars
we will have to cut military personnel
by two hundred and fifty thousand civilian personnel by a
hundred thousand jobs in america by a
hundred thousand we would have to
stretch out our aircraft procurement we
would have to reduce our naval
construction program we would have to
reduce the uh research and development for
the army the navy the air force and
marines by eight percent we would have
to close twenty military bases in the united
states immediately that's the kind of a
defense program that uh mr carter wants
let me tell you this straight from the
shoulder you don't negotiate with mr
brezhnev from weakness and the kind of a
defense program that mr carter wants
will mean a weaker defense and a poor
negotiating position mr trewhitt a
question for president ford mr
president my question really is the
other side of the coin from mr
frankel's for a generation the united
states has had a foreign policy based on
containment of communism yet we have
lost the first war in vietnam we lost a
shoving match in angola uh the communists
threatened to come to power by peaceful
means in italy and relations generally
have cooled with the soviet union in the
last few months so let me ask you first
what do you do about such cases as italy
and secondly does this general drift
mean that we're moving back toward
something like an old cold cold-war
relationship with the soviet union i
don't believe we should move to a cold
war relationship i think it's in the
best interest of the united states and
the world as a whole that the united
states negotiate rather than go back to
the cold war relationship with the
soviet union
i don't uh look at the picture as bleakly
as you have indicated in your question
mr trewhitt i believe that the united
states has had many successes in recent
years in recent months as far as the
communist movement is concerned we have
been successful in portugal where a year
ago it looked like there was a very
great possibility that the uh communists
would take over in portugal it didn't
happen we have a democracy in portugal
today a few uh months ago or i should say
maybe two years ago the soviet union
looked like they had continued strength
in the middle east today
according to prime minister rabin the
soviet union is weaker in the middle
east than they have been in many many
years the facts are there the soviet
union relationship with egypt is uh at a
low level the soviet union relationship
with syria is at a very low point the
united states today
according to prime minister rabin of
israel is at a peak in its uh influence and
power in the middle east but let's turn
for a minute to the uhh southern african
operations that are now going on the
united states of america took the
initiative in southern africa we wanted
to end the bloodshed in southern africa
we wanted to have the right of
self-determination in southern africa we
wanted to have majority rule with the
full protection of the rights of the
minority we wanted to preserve human
dignity in southern africa we have taken
the initiative and in southern africa
today the united states is trusted by
the black frontline nations and black
africa the united states is trusted by
the other elements in southern africa
the united states foreign policy under
this administration has been one of
progress and success and i believe that
instead of talking about soviet progress
we can talk about
american successes and may i make an
observation part of the question you
asked mr trewhitt i don't believe that
it's in the best interest of the united
states and the nato nations to have a
communist government in nato mr carter
has indicated he would look with
sympathy to a communist government in
nato i think that would destroy the
integrity and the strength of nato and i
am totally opposed to it
well mr ford unfortunately has just made a statement
that's not true i have never advocated a
communist government for italy that
would obviously be a ridiculous thing
for anyone to do who wanted to be
president of this country i think that this
is uh an instance of uh deliberate
distortion and this has occurred also in
the question about defense as a matter
of fact uh i've never advocated any cut of
fifteen billion dollars in our defense budget
as a matter of fact mr ford has made a
political football out of the defense
budget about a year ago he cut the
pentagon budget six point eight billion
dollars after he fired james schlesinger
the political heat got so great that he
added back about three billion dollars
when ronald reagan won the texas primary
election mr ford added back another one
and a half billion dollars immediately
before the kansas city convention he
added back another one point eight billion dollars
in the defense budget and his own uh office
of management and budget testified that
he had a three billion dollar cut
insurance added to the defense budget
defense budget under the pressure from
the pentagon obviously this is another
indication of trying to use the defense
budget for political purposes which he's
trying to do tonight now we went into
south africa late after great britain
rhodesia the black nations had been
trying to solve this problem for many
many years we didn't go in until right
before the election similar to what was
taking place in 1972 when mr kissinger
announced peace is at hand just before the
election at that time and we have
weakened our position in nato because
the other countries in europe supported
the democratic forces in portugal long
before we did we stuck to the portugal
dictatorships much longer than other
democracies did in this world mr valeriani
a question for governor carter
governor carter much of what the united
states does abroad is done in the name
of the national interest what is your
concept of the national interest what
should the role of the united states in
the world be and in that connection
considering your limited experience in
foreign affairs and the fact that you
take some pride in being a
washington outsider don't you think it
would be appropriate for you to tell the
american voters before the election the
people that you would like to have in
key positions such as secretary of state
secretary of defense national security
affairs adviser at the white house well
i'm not gonna name my cabinet before i
get elected i've got a little ways to
go before i start doing that but i have
uh an adequate background i believe i am a
graduate of the u.s naval academy the
first military graduate since uh
eisenhower i've served as governor of georgia
and have traveled extensively in foreign
countries and south america central
america europe the middle east and in
japan i've traveled the last twenty-one months
among the people of this country i've
talked to them and i've listened and
i've seen it firsthand in a very vivid
way the deep hurt that's come to this
country in the aftermath of vietnam and
cambodia chile and pakistan and angola and
watergate cia revelations what we were
formerly so proud of the strength of our
country its uh moral integrity the
representation in foreign affairs of
what our people are what our
constitution stands for has been gone
and in the secrecy that has surrounded
our foreign policy in the last few years
uh the american people the congress
have been excluded i believe i know what
this country ought to be i've uh been one
who's loved my nation as many americans
do and i believe that there's no limit
placed on what we can be in the future
if we can harness the tremendous
resources militarily economically and
the stature of our people the meaning of
the constitution in the future every time
we've made a serious mistake in foreign
affairs it's been because the american
people have been excluded from the
process if we can just tap the
intelligence and ability the sound
common sense and the good judgment of the
american people we can once again have a
foreign policy to make us proud instead
of ashamed and i'm not going to exclude
the american people from that process in
the future as mr ford and kissinger
have done this is what it takes to have
a sound foreign policy
strong at home strong defense permanent
commitments not betray the principles of
our country and involve the american
people into congress in the shaping of
our foreign policy every time mr ford
speaks from a position of secrecy in
negotiations in secret in secret
treaties that have been uh pursued and
achieved in supporting dictatorships in
ignoring human rights we are weak and
the rest of the world knows it so these
are the ways that we can restore the
strength of our country and they don't
require long experience in foreign
policy nobody has that except a
president who has served a long time or
a secretary of state but my background my
experience my knowledge of the people of
this country my commitment to our
principles that don't change those are
the best bases to correct the horrible
mistakes of this administration and
restore our own country to a position of
leadership in the world how specifically
uh governor are you going to bring the
american people into the decision-making
process in foreign policy what does that
mean first of all i would quit
conducting the decision-making process
in secret as has been a characteristic
of mr kissinger and mr ford in many
instances we've made agreements like in
vietnam uh that have uh been revealed later on
to our uh embarrassment recently ian smith the
uh president of uh rhodesia announced that he
had unequivocal commitments from mr
kissinger that he could not reveal the
american people don't know what those
commitments are we've seen uh in the
past the destruction of elected
governments like in chile and the strong
support of military dictatorship there
these kinds of things have hurt us very
much i would restore the concept of the
fireside chat which was an integral
part of the administration of franklin
roosevelt and i would also restore the
involvement of the congress when harry
truman was president he was not afraid
to have a strong secretary of defense
dean acheson george marshall were strong
secretaries of uh state excuse me state but
he also made sure that there was a
bipartisan support the members of
congress arthur vandenberg walter
george were part of the process and
before our nation made a secret
agreement or before we made a bluffing statement
we were sure that we had the backing not
only of the president and the secretary of
state but also of the congress and the
people this is a responsibility of the
president and i think it's very damaging
to our country for mr ford to have
turned over this responsibility to the
secretary of state president ford do you
have a response governor carter again
contradicts himself he complains about
secrecy and yet he is quoted as saying
that in the attempt to find a solution
in the middle east that he would hold
unpublicized meetings with the soviet
union i presume for the purpose of an imposing a
settlement on israel and the arab
nations but let me talk just a minute
about what we've done to avoid secrecy
in the ford administration after the
united states took the initiative in
working with israel and with egypt and
achieving the sinai ii agreement and i'm
proud to say that not a single egyptian
or israeli soldier has lost his life
since the signing of the sinai agreement
but at the time that uh i submitted the
sinai agreement to the congress of the
united states
i submitted every single document that
was applicable to the sinai ii agreement
it was the most complete documentation
by any president of any agreement signed
by a president on behalf of the united
states now as far as meeting with the
congress is concerned during the twenty-four
months that i've been the president of
the united states
i have averaged better than one meeting
a month with responsible groups or
committees of the congress both house
and senate the secretary of state has
appeared in the several years that he's
been the secretary before eighty different
uh committee hearings in the house and in
the senate the secretary of state has
made better than fifty speeches all over
the united states explaining american
foreign policy i have made myself at least ten
uh speeches in various parts of the country
where i have discussed with the american
people defense and foreign policy mr
frankel a question for president ford
mr president i'd like to explore a
little more deeply our relationship with
the russians they used to brag back in
khrushchev's day that because of their
greater patience and because of our
greed for for business deals that they would
sooner or later get the better of us is
it possible that despite some setbacks
in the middle east they've proved their
point our allies in france and italy are
now flirting with communism we've
recognized the permanent communist regime
in east germany we've virtually signed in
helsinki an agreement that the russians
have dominance in eastern europe we've
bailed out soviet agriculture with our
huge grain sales we've given them large
loans access to our best technology and
if the senate hadn't interfered with the
jackson amendment maybe we you would have
given them even larger loans is that
what you call a two-way street of
traffic in europe i believe that we have
uh negotiated with the soviet union since
i've been president from a position of
strength and let me cite several
examples shortly after i became
president in uh december of 1974
i met with uh general secretary brezhnev in
vladivostok and we agreed to a mutual
cap on the ballistic missile launchers
at a ceiling of twenty-four hundred which means that
the soviet union if that becomes a
permanent agreement will have to make a
reduction in their launchers that they
now have or plan to have i've negotiated at
vladivostok with uh mr brezhnev a
limitation on the mirving of their
ballistic missiles at a figure of thirteen-twenty
which is the first time that any
president has achieved a cap either on
launchers or on mirvs it seems to me that
we can go from there
to uh the uh grain sales the grain sales have
been a benefit to american agriculture
we have achieved a five and
three-quarter year uh sale of a minimum of
six million metric tons which means
that they have already bought about four
million metric tons this year and are
bound to buy another two million metric
tons to take the grain and corn and
wheat that the american farmers have
produced in order to uh have full
production and these grain sales to the
soviet union have helped us tremendously
in meeting the costs of the additional
oil and the oil that we have bought from
overseas if we turn to helsinki i'm glad
you raised it mr uh frankel in the case of
helsinki thirty-five nations signed an agreement
including the secretary of state for the
vatican i can't under any circumstances believe
that the his holiness the pope would
agree by signing that agreement that the
thirty-five nations have turned over to the
warsaw pact nations the domination of
the eastern europe it just isn't true
and if mr carter alleges that his
holiness by signing that has done it he
is totally inaccurate now what has been
accomplished by the helsinki agreement
number one we have an agreement where
they notify us and we notify them of any
uh military maneuvers that are to be
undertaken they have done it in both
cases where they've done so there is no
soviet domination of eastern europe and
there never will be
under a ford administration
governor carter i'm sorry i could i just follow
did i understand you to say sir that the
russians are not using eastern europe as
their own sphere of influence in
occupying most of the countries there
and and making sure with their troops
that it's a that it's a communist zone
whereas on our side of the line the
italians and the french are still
flirting with the possibility of communism i don't believe uh mr
frankel that uh the yugoslavians consider
themselves dominated by the soviet union
i don't believe that the romanians
consider themselves dominated by the
soviet union i don't believe that the
poles consider themselves dominated by
the soviet union each of those countries
is independent autonomous it has its own
territorial integrity and the united
states does not concede that those
countries are under the domination of
the soviet union as a matter of fact i
visited poland yugoslavia and romania to
make certain that the people of those
countries understood that the president
of the united states and the people of
the united states are dedicated to their
independence their autonomy and their
freedom governor carter may i have your response
well in the first place i'm not
criticizing his holiness the pope i was
talking about mr ford the uh fact is
that secrecy has surrounded the
decisions made by the ford
administration in the case of the
helsinki agreement it may have been a
good agreement at the beginning but we
have failed to enforce the so-called
basket three part which insures the right of
people to migrate to join their families
to be free to speak out the soviet union
is still jamming radio free europe radio
uh uh radio free europe is being jammed we've
also seen a very serious uh problem with
the so-called sonnenfeldt document
which apparently mr ford has just
endorsed which said that there's an organic
linkage between the eastern european
countries and the soviet union
and i would like to see mr ford
convince the polish-americans and the
czech-americans and the
hungarian-americans in this country that those
countries don't live under the
domination and supervision of the soviet
union behind the iron curtain we also
have seen mr ford exclude himself from
access to the public he hasn't had a
tough cross-examination type press
conference in over thirty days one press
conference he had without sound he's
also shown a weakness in yielding to
pressure the soviet union for instance
put pressure on mr ford and he refused
to see a symbol of human freedom
recognized around the world aleksandr
solzhenitsyn the arabs have put pressure
on mr ford and he's yielded and has
permitted a boycott by the arab
countries of american businesses who
trade with israel or who have american jews
owning or taking part in the management
of american companies his own secretary
of commerce had to be subpoenaed by the
congress to reveal the names of
businesses who were subject to this
boycott they didn't volunteer the information he
had to be subpoenaed and the last thing
i'd like to say is this this grain deal
with the soviet union in 72 was terrible
and mr ford made up for it with three
embargoes one against our own ally in
japan that's not the way to run our
foreign policy including international
trade mr trewhitt a question for
governor carter governor i'd like to pick up
on that point actually and on your
appeal for a greater measure of american
idealism in foreign affairs foreign
affairs come home to the american public
pretty much in such issues as oil
embargoes and grain sales that sort of
thing would you be willing to to risk an
oil embargo in order to promote human
rights in iran and saudi arabia withhold
arms from saudi arabia for the same
purpose uh or uh i think you matter of fact
you've perhaps answered this final part
but would you withhold grain from the
soviet union in order to promote civil
rights in the in the soviet union
i would never single out food as a trade
embargo item if i ever decided to impose
an embargo because of a crisis in
international relationships it would include
all shipments of all equipment for
instance if the arab countries ever
again declare an embargo against our
nation on oil i would consider that not
a military but an economic declaration
of war and i would respond instantly and
in kind i would not ship that arab
country anything no weapons no spare
parts for weapons no oil-drilling rigs
no oil pipe no nothing i wouldn't single
out just food another thing i'd like
to say is this in our international
trade as i said in my opening statement
we have become the arms merchant of the
world when this republican
administration came into office we were
shipping about 1 billion dollars worth
of arms overseas now ten to twelve billion
dollars worth of arms overseas to
countries that quite often use these
weapons to fight each other the shift in
emphasis has been very disturbing to me
speaking about the middle east under the
last democratic administration sixty percent of
all weapons that went into the middle
east were for israel nowadays seventy-five percent were
for israel before now sixty percent go to the arab
countries and this does not include iran
if you include iran our present shipment
of weapons to the middle east only twenty percent
goes to israel this is a deviation from
idealism it's a deviation from a
commitment to our major ally in
the middle east which is israel
it's a yielding to economic pressure on
the part of the arabs on the oil issue
and it's also a tremendous indication
that under the ford administration we
have not addressed the energy policy
adequately we still have no
comprehensive energy policy in this
country and it's an overall sign of
weakness when we are weak at home
economically high unemployment high
inflation a confused government a
wasteful defense establishment this
encourages the kind of pressure that's
been put on us successfully it would
have been inconceivable ten fifteen years ago
for us to be brought to our knees with
an arab oil embargo but it was done
three years ago and they're still
putting pressure on us
from the arab countries to our discredit
around the world these are the
weaknesses that i see and i believe it's
not just a matter of idealism it's a
matter of being tough it's a matter of
being strong it's a matter of being
consistent our priorities ought to be
first of all to meet our own military
needs secondly to meet the needs of our
allies and friends and only then should
we ship military equipment to foreign
countries as a matter of fact iran is
going to get eighty f-14s before we even
meet our own air force orders for f-14s
and the shipment of spruance-class
destroyers to iran are much more highly
sophisticated than the spruance-class
destroyers that are present being
delivered to our own navy this is
ridiculous and it ought to be changed
governor let me pursue that if i may if
i understand you correctly you would in
fact to use my examples withhold arms
from iran and saudi arabia even if the
risk was an oil embargo and if they
should be securing those arms from
somewhere else and then if the embargo
came then you'd respond in kind do i
have it correctly if iran is not an arab
country as you know it is a moslem
country but if saudi arabia should
declare an oil embargo against us then i
would consider that an economic
declaration of war and i would make sure
that the uh saudis understood this ahead of
time so there would be no doubt in their
mind i think under those circumstances
they would refrain from pushing us to
our knees as they did in 1973 with their
previous oil embargo president ford
governor carter
uh apparently doesn't realize that since
i've been president we have sold to the
israelis over four billion dollars in
military hardware we have made available
to the israelis over forty-five percent of the total
economic and military aid since the
establishment of israel twenty-seven years ago so
the ford administration has done a good
job in helping our good ally israel
and we're dedicated to the survival and
security of israel
i believe that governor carter doesn't
realize the need and necessity for arms
sales to iran he indicates he would not
make those iran is bordered very
extensively by the soviet union
iran has iraq as one of its neighbors
the soviet union and the communist
dominated government of iraq are
neighbors of iran and iran is an ally
of the united states it's my strong
feeling that we ought to sell arms to
iran for its own national security and
as an ally a strong ally of the united
states the history of our relationship
with iran goes back to the days of
president truman when he decided that it
was vitally necessary for our own
security as well as that of iran that we
should help that country and iran has
been a good ally in 1973 when there was
an oil embargo iran did not participate
iran continued to sell oil to the united
states i believe that it's in our
interest and in the interest of israel
and iran and saudi arabia for the united
states to sell arms to those countries
it's for their security as well as ours
mr valeriani a question for
president ford
mr president the policy of your
administration is to normalize relations
with mainland china and that means
establishing at some point full
diplomatic relations and obviously doing
something about the mutual defense
treaty with taiwan if you are elected
will you move to establish full
diplomatic relations with peking and
will you abrogate the mutual defense
treaty with taiwan and as a corollary
would you provide mainland china with
military equipment if the chinese were
to ask for
it our relationship with the people's
republic of china is based upon the
shanghai communique of 1972 and that
communique calls for the normalization
of relations between the united states
and the people's republic it doesn't set
a time schedule it doesn't uh make a
determination as to how uh that
relationship should be achieved in
relationship to our current uhh diplomatic
recognition and obligations to the
taiwanese government the shanghai
communique does say that the differences
between the people's republic on the one
hand and taiwan on the other shall be
settled by peaceful means the net result
is this administration and during my
time as the president for the next four
years we will continue to move for
normalization of relations in the
traditional sense and we will insist
that the disputes between taiwan and the
people's republic be settled peacefully
as was agreed in the shanghai communique
of 1972 the ford administration will not
let down will not eliminate or forget
our obligation to the people of taiwan
we feel that there must be a continued
obligation to the people the some nineteen or
twenty million people in taiwan and as we
move during the next four years those
will be the policies of this
administration and sir the military
equipment for the mainland chinese there
is no policy of this government to give
to the people's republic or to sell to
the people's republic of china military
equipment i do not believe that we the
united states should sell give or
otherwise transfer military hardware to
the people's republic of china or any
other communist nation such as the
soviet union and the like governor
carter well i'd like to go back just one
moment to the previous question where
uh mr ford i think confused the issue by
trying to say that we are shipping
israel forty percent of our aid as a matter of fact
during this current year we are
shipping iran or have contracted to ship
to iran about seven and a half billion
dollars worth of arms and also to saudi
arabia about seven and a half billion
dollars worth of arms also in 1975 we
almost brought israel to their knees
after the uh yom kippur war by the so
called reassessment of our relationship
to israel we in effect tried to make
israel the scapegoat for the problems in
the middle east and this weakened our
relationships with israel a great deal
and put a cloud on the total commitment
that our people feel toward the israelis
there ought to be a clear unequivocal
commitment without change to israel in
the far east i think we need to continue to
be uh strong and uh i would certainly uh pursue
the uh normalization of uh relationships with
the people's republic of china we
opened a great opportunity in 1972 which has
pretty well been frittered frit
frittered away under mr ford that ought
to be a constant uh inclination toward
uh toward friendship but i would never let
that friendship with the people's
republic of china stand in the way of
the preservation of the independence and
freedom of the people on taiwan
mr frankel a question for governor
carter governor we always seem in our
elections and maybe in between too to
argue about uh who can be tougher in the
world give or take a a few billion dollars
give or take one weapon systems our
leading politicians and i think you too
gentlemen seem to settle roughly on the
same strategy in the world at roughly
the same pentagon budget cost how bad do
things have to get in our own economy or
how much backwardness and hunger would
it take in the world to persuade you
that our national security and our
survival required very drastic cutbacks
in arms spending and dramatic new
efforts in other directions well always
in the past we've had an ability to have
a strong defense and also have to have a
strong uh domestic economy and also to be
strong in our reputation and influence
within the community of nations
these uh characteristics of our country
have been endangered under mr ford we
are no longer respected in a showdown
vote in the united nations or in in any
other international council we're lucky
to get twenty percent of the other nations to vote
with us our allies feel that we've
neglected them the so-called nixon shock
against japan had weakened our
relationships there under this
administration we've also had an
inclination to keep separate the
european countries thinking that if they
are separate then we can dominate them
and proceed with our secret lone
ranger-type diplomatic efforts i would uh also
like to point out that we in this
country have let our economy go down the
drain the worst inflation since the
great depression the highest
unemployment of any developed nation of
the world we have a higher unemployment
rate in this country than great britain
and west germany our unemployment rate
is twice as high as it is in italy it's
three or four times as high as it is as it is in
japan and that terrible circumstance in
this country is exported overseas we
comprise about 30 percent of the world's
economic trade power influence and when
we're weak at home weaker than all our
allies that weakness weakens the whole
free world so strong economy is very
important another thing that we need to
do is to reestablish the good
relationships that we ought to have
between the united states and our
natural allies and friends they have felt
neglected and using that base of
strength and using the idealism the
honesty the predictability the
commitment the integrity of our own
country that's where our strength lies and that
would permit us to deal with the
developing nations in a position of
strength under this administration we've
had a continuation of the so-called
balance of power politics where
everything is looked on as a struggle
between us on the one side the soviet
union on the other our allies the
smaller countries get trampled in the
rush what we need is to try to seek
individualized bilateral relationships
with countries regardless of their size
and to establish world-order politics
which means that we want to preserve
peace through strength we also want to
revert back to the stature and the
respect that our country had in previous
administrations now i can't say when
this can come but i can guarantee it
will not come if gerald ford is
reelected and this present policy is
continued it will come if i'm elected if i
hear you right sir you're saying guns
and butter both but president johnson
also had trouble uh keeping up both vietnam
and his domestic programs i was really
asking when do the the needs of the
cities and our own needs and those of
other backward an and and even more needy
countries and societies around the world
take precedence over some of our
military spending ever well let me say
very quickly that under president
johnson in spite of the massive
investment in the vietnam war he turned
over a balanced budget to mr nixon the
unemployment rate was less than four percent the
inflation rate under kennedy and johnson
was about two percent one-third what it is under
this administration so we did have at
that time with good management the
ability to do both i don't think anybody
can say that johnson and kennedy
neglected the poor and the destitute
people in this country or around the
world but i can say this the number one
responsibility of any president above
all else is to guarantee the security of
our nation an ability to be free of the
threat of attack or blackmail and to
carry out our obligations to our allies
and friends and to carry out a
legitimate foreign policy they must go
hand in hand but the security of this
nation has got to come first
president ford let me say very
categorically you cannot maintain the
security and the strength of the united
states with the kind of defense budget
cuts that governor carter has indicated
in 1975 he wanted to cut the budget 15
billion dollars he's now down to a
figure of five to seven billion dollars
reductions of that kind will not permit
the united states to be strong enough to
deter aggression and maintain the peace
governor carter apparently doesn't know
the facts as soon as i became president
i initiated meetings with the nato heads
of state and met with them in brussels
to discuss how we could improve the
defense relationship in western europe
in uh november of 1975 i met with the
leaders of the five industrial nations
in france for the purpose of seeing what
we could do acting together to meet the
problems of uh the coming recession in
puerto rico this year i met with six of
the leading industrial nations heads of
state to meet the problem of inflation
so we would be able to solve it before
it got out of hand i have met with the
heads of government bilaterally as well
as multilaterally our relations with
japan have never been better i was the
first united states president to visit
japan and we uh had the emperor of japan
here this uh past year and the net result
is japan and the united states are
working more closely together now than
at any time in the history of our
relationship you can go around the world
and let me take israel for example just
recently president rabin said that our
relations were never better
mr trewhitt a question for president
ford mr president you referred earlier to
your meeting with mr brezhnev at
vladivostok in 1974 at you agreed on
that occasion to try to achieve another
strategic arms limitation salt agreement
within the year nothing happened in 1975
are not very much publicly at least and
those talks are still dragging things
got quieter is the current season
approached is there is there a bit of
politics involved there perhaps on both
sides are perhaps more important our
interim weapons developments and i'm
thinking of such things as the cruise
missile and the soviet ss 20
intermediate range rocket making salt
irrelevant by passing the salt
negotiations first we have to understand
that salt 1 expires october 3rd 1977 mr
brezhnev and i met in vladivostok in
december of 1974 for the purpose of
trying to take the initial step so we
could have a salt ii agreement that
would go to 1985 as i indicated earlier
we did agree on a 2,400 limitation on
launchers of ballistic missiles that
would mean a cutback in the soviet
program it would not interfere with our
own program at the same time we put a
limitation of 1320 on mers our
technicians have been working since that
time in geneva trying to put into
technical language a an agreement that
can be verified by both parties in the
meantime there has developed the problem
of the soviet backfire their
high-performance aircraft which they say
is not a long-range aircraft in which
some of our people say is a
intercontinental aircraft in the interim
there has been the development on our
part primarily the cruise missiles
cruise missiles that could be launched
from land-based mobile
installations cruise missiles that could
be launched a launch from
high-performance aircraft like the b-52s
or the b ones which i hope we proceed
with cruise missiles which could be
launched from either surface or
submarine naval vessels those gray area
weapon systems are creating some
problems in the agreement for assault to
negotiation but i can say that i am
dedicated to proceeding and i met just
last week with the foreign minister of
the soviet union and he indicated to me
that the soviet union was interested in
narrowing the differences and making a
realistic and a sound compromise i hope
and trust in the best interest of both
countries and in the best interest of
all people throughout this globe that
the soviet union and the united states
can make a mutually beneficial agreement
because if we do not and salt 1 expires
on october 3 1977 you will unleash again
and all-out nuclear arms race with the
potential of a nuclear holocaust of
unbelievable dimensions so it's the
obligation of the president to do just
that and i intend to do so mr president
let me follow that up by i submit that
the cruise missile adds a whole new
dimension to the to the arms competition
and then cite a statement by your office
to the arms control association a few
days ago in which you said that the
cruise missile might eventually be
included in a comprehensive arms
limitation agreement but that in the
meantime it was an essential part of the
american strategic arsenal now may i
assume from that that you're tending to
exclude the cruise missile from the next
salt agreement or is it still negotiable
in that context i believe that
the cruise missiles which we are now
developing in research and development
across the spectrum from air from the
sea or from the land can be included
within a salt agreement they are a new
weapon system that has a great potential
both conventional and nuclear armed at
the same time we have to make certain
that the soviet union's backfire which
they claim is not an intercontinental
aircraft in which some of our people
contend is must also be included if we
are to get the kind of an agreement
which is in the best interest of both
countries a really believe that if it's
far better for us and for the soviet
union and more importantly for the
people around the world that these two
superpowers find an answer for assault
agreement before october 3 1977 i think
good will on both parts hard bargaining
by both parties and a reasonable
compromise will be in the best interest
of all parties governor carter well mr
ford acts like he's running for
president for the first time he's been
in office two years and there has been
absolutely no progress made toward a new
salt agreement he has learned the date
of the expiration of salt one apparently
we've seen in this world a development
of a tremendous threat to us as a
nuclear engineer myself i know the
limitations and capabilities of atomic
power i also know that as far as the
human beings on this earth are concern
that the non-proliferation of atomic
weapons is number one only the last few
days with the election approaching as
mr ford taken any interest in a
non-proliferation movement i advocated
last may in a speech at the united
nations that we move immediately as a
nation to declare a complete moratorium
on the test
of all nuclear devices both weapons and
peaceful devices that we not ship any
more atomic fuel to a country that
refuses to comply with strict controls
over the waste which can be reprocessed
into explosives
i've also advocated that we stop the
sale by germany and france of recessing
plants to pakistan in brazil mr food
hasn't moved on this we also need to
provide an adequate supply of enriched
uranium mr ford again under pressure
from the atomic energy lobby has
insisted that this reprocessing or other
rhian richmond be done by private
industry and not by the existing our
government plants this kind of confusion
and absence of leadership has let us
drift now for two years with a
constantly increasing threat of atomic
weapons throughout the world we now have
five nations that have atomic bombs that
we know about if we continue under mr
ford's policy by 1985 or 90 we'll have
20 nations that have the capability of
exploding atomic weapons this has got to
be stopped that is one of the major
challenges and major undertakings that i
will assume as a next president mr
valeriani a question for governor carter
governor carter earlier tonight you said
america is not strong anymore america is
not respected anymore and i feel i must
ask you do you really believe that the
united states is not the strongest
country in the world do you really
believe that the united states is not
the most respected country in the world
or is that just campaign rhetoric no
it's not just campaign rhetoric i think
that militarily we are strong as any
nation on earth i think we've got to
stay that way and continue to increase
our capabilities to meet any potential
threat but as far as strength derived
from commitment to principles as far as
strength derived from the unity within
our country as far as strength derived
from the people the congress the
secretary of state the president sharing
in the evolution and carrying out of a
foreign policy as far as strength
derived from the respect of our own
allies and friends
assurance that we will be staunch in our
commitment that we will not deviate and
it will give them adequate attention as
far as a strength derived from doing
what's right
caring for the pool providing food
becoming the breadbasket of the world
instead of the arms merchants of the
world in those respects we're not strong
also we'll never be strong again
overseas unless we are strong at home
and with our economy and such terrible
disarray and getting worse by the month
we've got 500,000 more americans
unemployed today than we had three
months ago we've got two and a half
million more americans out of work now
then we have mr porter koffice this
kind of deterioration in our economic
strength is bound to weaken us around
the world and we not only have problems
at home but we export those problems
overseas so as far as the respect of our
own people toward our own government as
far as participation in the shaping for
concepts and commitments as far as the
trust of our country among the nations
of the world is for us dependents of our
country in meeting the needs and
obligations that we've expressed our
allies as far as a respect of our
country even among our potential
adversaries we're weak potentially we're
strong under this administration that
strength has not been realized president
ford governor carter brags about the
unemployment during democratic
administrations and condemns the
unemployment at the present time i must
remind him that we're at peace and
during the period that he brags about
unemployment being low the united states
was at war now let me correct one other
comment that governor carter has made i
have recommended to the congress that we
develop the uranium enrichment plant at
portsmouth ohio which is a publicly
owned us government facility and have
indicated that the private program which
would follow on in alabama is one that
may or may not be constructive but i am
committed to the one at portsmouth ohio
the governor also talks about morality
in foreign policy the foreign policy of
the united states meets the highest
standards of morality
what is more moral than peace and the
united states is at peace today
what is more moral in foreign policy
than food conference in rome in 1974
when the united states committed six
million metric tons of food over 60 of
the food committed for the disadvantaged
and underdeveloped nations of the world
the ford administration wants to
eradicate hunger and disease in our
underdeveloped countries throughout the
what is more moral than for the united
states under the ford administration to
take the lead in southern africa in the
middle east
those are initiatives in foreign policy
which are of the highest moral standard
and that is indicative of the foreign
policy of this country mr fraenkel a
question for president ford mr
president can we stick with morality
yeah for a lot of people seems to cover
a bunch of sins mr nixon and mr
kissinger used to tell us that instead
of morality we had to worry in the world
about living with and letting live all
kinds of governments that we really
didn't like north and south korean
dictator's chilean fascists chinese
communists iranian emperors and so on
they said the only way to get by in a
wicked world was to treat others on the
basis of how they treated us and not how
they treated their own people but more
recently we seem to have taken a
different tack we seem to have decided
that as it is part of our business to
tell the rhodesians for instance that
the way they're treating their own black
people is wrong and they've got changed
their government we put pressure on them
we were rather liberal in our advice to
the italians as to how to vote is this a
new ford foreign policy in the making
can we expect that you are now going to
turn to south africa and force them to
change their government to intervene in
similar ways to end the bloodshed as you
called it say in chile or chilean
prisons and to throw our weight around
for the for the values that that we hold
dear in the world i believe that our
foreign policy must express the highest
standards of morality and the
initiatives that we took in southern
africa are the best examples of what
this administration is doing and will
continue to do in the next four years if
the united states had not moved when we
did in southern africa there's no doubt
there would have been an acceleration of
bloodshed in that tragic part of the
world if we have not taken our
initiative it's very very possible that
the government of rhodesia would have
been overrun and that the soviet union
and the cubans would have dominated
southern africa so the united states
seeking to preserve the principle of
self-determination to eliminate the
possibility of bloodshed to protect the
rights of the minority as we insisted
upon the rights of the majority
i believe followed the good conscience
of the american people in foreign policy
and i believe that we have used our
skill secretary of state kissinger has
done a superb job in working with the
black african nations of so-called
front-line nations he has done a superb
job in getting the prime minister of
south africa mr forester to agree that
the time had come for a solution to the
problem of rhodesia secretary kissinger
in his meeting with prime minister smith
of rhodesia was able to convince
that it was in the best interests of
whites as well as blacks in rhodesia to
find an answer for a transitional
government and then a majority
government this is a perfect example of
the kind of leadership that the united
states under this administration has
taken and i can assure you that this
administration will follow that high
moral principle in our future efforts in
foreign policy including our efforts in
the middle east where it is vitally
important because the middle east is the
crossroads of the world there have been
more disputes and it's an area where
there's more volatility than any other
place in the world but because arab
nations and the israelis trust the
united states we were able to take the
lead in the sinai to agreement and i can
assure you that the united states will
have the leadership role in moving
toward a comprehensive settlement of the
middle eastern problems i hope and trust
as soon as possible and we will do it
with the highest moral principles mr
president just clarify one point there
are lots of majorities in the world that
feel they're being pushed around by
minority governments and are you saying
they can now expect to look to us for
not just good cheer but throwing our
weight on their side in south africa or
on taiwan or in chile to help change
their governments as in rhodesia i would
hope that as we move to one area of the
world from another and the united states
must not spread itself too thinly that
was one of the problems that helped to
create the circumstances in vietnam but
as we as a nation find that we are asked
by the various parties either one nation
against another or individual within a
nation that the united states will take
the leadership and try to resolve the
let me take south korea as an example i
have personally told president pak that
the united states does not condone the
kind of repressive measures that he has
taken in that country but i think in all
fairness and equity we have to recognize
the problem that south korea has on the
north they have north korea with 500,000
well-trained well-equipped troops they
are supported by the people's republic
of china they are supported by the
soviet union south korea faces a very
delicate situation now the united states
in this case this administration has
recommended a year ago and we have
reiterated it again this year that the
united states south korea north korea
and the people's republic of china sit
down at a conference table to resolve
the problems of the korean peninsula
this is a leadership role that the
united states under this administration
is carrying out and if we do it and i
think the opportunities and the
possibilities are getting better we will
have solved many of the internal
domestic problems that exist in south
korea at the present time
governor carter i notice that mr ford
didn't comment on the prisons in chile
this isn't a typical example maybe of
many others for this administration
overthrew an elected government and
helped to establish a military
dictatorship this has not been an
ancient history story last year on the
ford of all the food for peace that went
to south america eighty-five percent
went to the military dictatorship in
chile another point i want to make is
this he says we have to move from one
area of the world to another that's one
of the problems with this
administration's so-called shuttle
diplomacy by the secretary of states in
one country there are almost 150 others
that are wandering
what we're gonna do next what will be
the next secret agreement we don't have
a comprehensive understandable foreign
policy that deals with world problems or
even regional problems another thing to
concern me was what mr ford said about
unemployment at insinuating that under
johnson and kennedy that unemployment
could only be held down when this
country is at war karl marx said that
the free enterprise system in a
democracy can only continue to exist
when they are at war or preparing for
war karl marx was a grandfather of
communism i don't agree with that
statement i hope mr ford doesn't either
he has put pressure on the congress and
i don't believe mr ford would even deny
this to hold up on non-proliferation
legislation until the congress agreed
for an eight billion dollar program for
private industry to start producing
enriched uranium and the last thing i
want to make is this it talks about
peace and i'm thankful for peace we were
peaceful but mr ford went into office
but he and mr kissinger and others
tried to start a new vietnam in angola
and it was only the outcry of the
american people and the congress when
their secret deal was discovered there
prevented our renewed involvement in
that configuration which was taking
place there gentlemen i'm sorry to say
we do not have time enough for two
complete sequences of questions we now
have only 12 minutes left therefore i
would like to ask for shorter questions
and shorter answers and we also will
drop the follow-up question each
candidate may still respond of course to
the others answered mr truitt question
for governor carter
governor carter before this event the
most communications i received concern
panama is would you as president be
prepared to sign a treaty which at a
fixed date yielded administrative and
economic control of the canal zone and
shared defense which as i understand it
is the position the united states took
in 1974
well here again the panamanian question
is one that's been confused by mr ford
he had directed his diplomatic relations
well our representative to yield to the
panamanians formed sovereignty over the
panama canal zone at the end of a
certain period of time but mr reagan
raised this a question in florida mr
food not only disavowed his instructions
but he also even dropped parenthetically
the use of the word de time i would
never give up complete control or
practical control of the panama canal
zone but i would continue to negotiate
with the panamanians when the original
treaty was signed back in the early
1900's when theodore rose was president
panama retained sovereignty over the
panama canal zone we retain control as
though we had sovereignty now i would be
willing to go ahead with negotiations i
believe that we could share more fully
responsibilities for the panama canal
zone with panama i would be willing to
continue to raise the payment for
shipment of goods through the panama
canal zone
i might even be willing to reduce to
some degree our military emplacements in
the panama canal zone but i would not
relinquish practical control of the
panama canal zone in determine the
foreseeable future president thorn the
united states must and will maintain
complete access to the panama canal the
united states must maintain a defense
capability of the panama canal and the
united states will maintain our national
security interest in the panama canal
the negotiations for the panama canal
started under president johnson and have
continued up to the present time i
believe those negotiations should
continue but there are certain
guidelines that must be followed and
i've just defined them let me take just
a minute to comment on something that
governor carter said on non
new nonproliferation in may of 1975 i
call for a conference of nuclear
suppliers that conference has met six
times in may of this year governor
carter took the first initiative
approximately 12 months after i had
taken my initiative a year ago mr
valeriani a question for a president for
mr president the government accounting
office has just put out a report
suggesting that you shot from the hip
and the mayagez rescue mission and that
you ignored diplomatic messages saying
that a peaceful solution was in prospect
why didn't you do more diplomatically at
the time and a related question did the
white house try to prevent the release
of that report the white house did not
prevent the release of that report on
july 12th of this year we gave full
permission for the release of that
report i was very disappointed in the
fact that the gao released that report
because i think it interjected political
partisan politics at the present time
but let me comment on the report
somebody who sits in washington dc 18
months after the mayagez incident can
be a very good grandstand quarterback
and let me make another observation this
morning i got a call from the skipper of
the mayagez he was furious because he
told me that it was the action of me
president ford that saved the lives of
the crew of the mayagez and i can
assure you that if we had not taken the
strong and forceful action that we did
we would have been criticized very very
severely for sitting back and not moving
captain miller is thankful the crew is
thankful we did the right thing it seems
to me that those who sit in washington
18 months after the incident are
the best judges of the decision-making
process that had to be made by the
national security council and by myself
at the time the incident was developing
in the pacific let me assure you that we
made every possible overture to the
people's republic of china and through
them to the cambodian government we made
diplomatic protests to the cambodian
government through the united nations
every possible diplomatic means was
utilized but at the same time i had a
responsibility and so did the national
security council to meet the problem at
hand and we handled it responsibly and i
think captain miller's testimony to that
is the best evidence governor carter
well i'm reluctant to comment on the
recent report i haven't read it i think
the american people have only one
requirement that the facts about merguez
be given to them accurately and
mr ford has been there for 18 months he
had the fact that were released today
immediately after the merguez incident i
understand that the report today is
accurate mr ford has said i believe
that it was accurate and that the white
house made no attempt to block the
issuing of that report i don't know if
that's exactly accurate or not
understand that both the secretary of
department of state and the defense
department have approved the accuracy of
today's report on yesterday's report and
also the national security agency i
don't know what was right of what was
wrong or what was done the only thing i
believe is that whatever their knowledge
was at mr ford hand should have been
given to the american people 18 months
ago immediately after the mine crash so
interesting occurred this is what the
american people want when something
happens it endangers our security or
when something happens it threatens our
stature in the world or when american
people or endangered by the actions of a
foreign country just 40 sailors on the
marg where's we obviously had to move
aggressively and quickly to rescue them
but then after the immediate action is
taken i believe the president has an
obligation to tell the american people
the truth and not wait 18 months later
for the report to be issue gentlemen at
this time we have time for only two very
short questions mr fraenkel a question
for governor carter governor carter if
the price of gaining influence among the
arabs is closing our eyes a little bit
to their boycott against israel how
would you handle that
i believe that the boycott of american
businesses by the arab countries because
those businesses trade with israel
because they have american jews who are
owners or directors in the company is an
absolute disgrace this is the first time
that i remember in the history of our
country when we've got a foreign country
circumvent or change our bill of rights
i'll do everything i can as president to
stop the boycott of american businesses
by the arab countries it's not a matter
of diplomacy or trade with me it's a
matter of morality and i don't believe
that the arab countries will pursue it
when we have a strong president who will
protect the integrity of our country the
commitment of our constitution and bill
of rights and protect people in this
country who happen to be jews it may
later be catholics it may be it later be
baptist who are threatened by some
foreign country but we ought to stand
staunch and i think it's a disgrace it's
so far mr ford's administration has
blocked the passage of legislation that
would have revealed by law every
instance of the boycott and it would
have prevented the boycott from
continuing president ford again governor
carter is in akron the arab boycott
action was first taken in 1952 and in
november of 1975 i was the first
president to order the executive branch
to take action affirmative action
through the department of commerce and
other cabinet departments to make
certain that no american businessman or
business organization should
discriminate against jews because of an
arab boycott and i might add that my
administration and i'm very proud of it
is the first administration that has
taken an antitrust action against
companies in this country that have
allegedly cooperated with the arab
just on monday of this week i signed a
tax bill that included an amendment that
would prevent companies in the united
states from taking a tax deduction if
they have in any way whatsoever
cooperated with the arab boycott and
last week when we were trying to get the
export administration act through the
congress necessary legislation my
administration went to capitol hill and
tried to convince the house and the
senate that we should have an amendment
on that legislation which would take
strong and effective action against
those who participate or cooperate with
the arab a boycott one other point
because the congress failed to act i am
going to announce tomorrow that the
department of commerce will disclose
those companies that have participated
in the arab boycott this is something
that we can do the congress failed to do
it and we intend to do it mr truitt a
very brief question for president ford
mr president if you get the accounting
of missing an action you want from north
vietnam or from vietnam i'm sorry now
would you then be prepared to reopen
negotiations for a restoration of
relations with that country let me
restate our policy as long as vietnam
north vietnam does not give us a full
and complete accounting of our missing
in action i will never go along with the
admission of vietnam to the united
nations if they do give us a bonafide
complete accounting of the 800m ias then
i believe that the united states should
begin negotiations for the admission of
vietnam to the united nations but not
until they have given us the full
accounting of our mis
governor carter one of the most
embarrassing failures at the ford
administration and one that touches
specifically on human rights is his
refusal to a point a presidential
commission to go to vietnam to go to
laos to go to cambodia and try to trade
for the release of information about
those who are missing in action in those
wars this is what the families of mas
want so far mr ford has not done it
we've had several fragmentary efforts by
members of the congress and bryan by
private citizens several months ago the
vietnam government said we are ready to
sit down and negotiate for a lease of
information on in my age so far mr ford
has not responded i also would never
normalize relationships with vietnam nor
permit them to join the united nations
until they've taken this action but
that's not enough we need to have an
active and aggressive action on part of
the president leader of this country to
seek out every possible way to get that
information which has kept the m.i.a
families in despair and doubt and mr
ford has just not done it thank you
governor carter that completes the
questioning for this evening
each candidate now has up to three
minutes for a closing statement it was
determined by the toss of a coin that
governor carter would take the first
question and he now goes first with his
closing remarks governor carter
the purpose of this debate and the
outcome of the election will determine
three basic things leadership upholding
the principles of our country and proper
priorities and commitments for the
future this election will also determine
what kind of world we leave our children
will it be a nightmare world threatened
with the proliferation of atomic bombs
not just in five major countries but
dozens of smaller countries that have
been permitted to develop atomic weapons
because of a failure of our top
leadership to stop proliferation will we
have a world of hunger and hatred and
will we be living in a norms camp
stripped of our friendship and allies
hiding behind a tight defense that's
been drawn in around us because we are
fearful of the outside world will we
have a government of secrecy that
excludes the american people from
participation in making basic decisions
and therefore covers up mistakes and
makes it possible for our government our
government to depart from the principles
of our constitution bill of rights or
will we have a world of peace with the
threat of atomic weapons eliminated with
full trade with our people at work
inflation control openness in government
are people proud once again congress
citizens president secretary of state
working in harmony and unity to the
coming future a world where people have
enough to eat and a world where we care
about those who don't can we become a
breadbasket of the world instead of the
arms merchants of the world i believe we
can and we ought to now we've been heard
in recent years in this country
in the aftermath of vietnam cambodia
chile pakistan angola watergate cia
we've been hurt our people feel that
we've lost something precious that's not
necessary i want to see our nation risk
return to a posture and an image and a
standard to make us proud once again i
remember the world of nato and the world
of 0.4 and the world of the marshall
plan and the world of the peace corps
bucket we have that once again we ought
to be a beacon for nations who search
for peace and who search for freedom who
search for individual liberty we search
for basic human rights
we haven't been lately we can be once
again we'll never have that world
leadership until we are strong at home
and we can have that strength if we
return to the basic principles it don't
have to be a strength of bombast and
threats it ought to be a quiet strength
based on the integrity of our people the
vision of the constitution and in a
strong will and purpose that god's given
us in the greatest nation on earth
business force as we have seen tonight
foreign policy and defence policy are
difficult in complex issues we can
debate methods we can debate one
decision or another but there are two
things which cannot be debated
experience and results in the last two
years i have made policy decisions
involving long range difficulties and
policies and made day-to-day judgments
not only as president of the united
states but as the leader of the free
what is the result of that leadership
america is strong america is free
america is respected not a single young
american today is fighting or dying on
any foreign battlefield america is at
peace with freedom thank you in good
time thank you president ford thank you
governor carter i also want to thank our
questioners and the audience here this
evening the third and final debate
between president ford and governor
carter will take place on october the
22nd at 9:30 p.m eastern daylight time
on the campus of the college of william
and mary in williamsburg virginia the
subject matter will cover all issues
these debates are sponsored by the
league of women voters education fund to
help voters become better informed on
the issues and to generate greater voter
turnout in the november election now
from the palace of fine arts theatre in
san francisco good night